.. _qs-getting-access:

Getting Access
==============

A High-Performance Computing (HPC) cluster is a research infrastructure for multiple users to execute calculations beyond the capabilities of current personal computers and workstations.

To access our HPC clusters, you need to have a **WVU account** and use that WVU account to get an **HPC account**.

WVU Login Account
------------------

To gain access to WVU's Research Computing systems (including HPC systems),
users must first have a `WVU Login Account <http://login.wvu.edu>`__.

You can request a *WVU login account* for someone outside the WVU community so that they can access specific online resources here. You will need the person's legal name, birth date, and current email address to do so. You must complete the Special Account Request form to make the request. Click the **LOGIN Account Ticket** button to get started.

Any employee may submit a request on behalf of a colleague elsewhere, and there is no charge to request or use this service.

If you need a WVU Login account, please make a request with `Service Desk <https://helpdesk.hpc.wvu.edu>`_.

Click on **LOGIN Account Ticket** and follow the instructions.

Research Computing Account
--------------------------

After getting a *WVU Login Account*, you will need to request access to Research
Computing systems through the
`Research Computing Help Desk <https://helpdesk.hpc.wvu.edu>`_ web page by
clicking on the 'Open a new ticket' button and selecting
'New User Account Request' under the help topic. More information on :ref:`int-getting-help`

On *Help Topic* select *New User Account Request*
Enter your personal information, such as your Full Name and WVU's email address. 
WVU users cannot use personal email addresses (MSN, Gmail, etc.). 
External users should use an institutional account instead of a personal one.

Enter the field for *Principal Investigator (PI)*, he or she will be the person to be contacted to get your account accepted.

For accounting purposes, it is very important that you complete a *Project Title* and a reasonably complete *Project Abstract*. This information is collected to prepare usage reports for financing institutions.

HPC users must ensure data covered by Federal security or privacy laws (e.g., HIPAA, ITAR, FERPA, classified information, etc.) is not stored on any WVU HPC system. These systems currently do not meet the enhanced security requirements imposed or implied by those laws or regulations. By selecting the check mark, you are acknowledging you will not store ANY protected data on WVU's HPC systems.

Please acknowledge the use of these supercomputing systems. 
Thorny Flat was largely funded by NSF Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Grant Award #1726534. 
Dolly Sods was funded by NSF Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Grant Award #2117575. 
Researchers should acknowledge these grants in publications produced using these resources.

Before your account is granted, the PI will be notified for acceptance, and your *HPC account* will be created. You will be notified once the account is ready for use.

For any additional questions regarding access, please email us at
`helpdesk@hpc.wvu.edu <mailto:helpdesk@hpc.wvu.edu>`_.
